---
layout: distill
title: Instant Notes - Genus
date: 2022-07-28 14:52:00+0800
description: Here are the notes on the topological properties of biomolecular structure.
tags: instant-notes
categories: review
authors:
  - name: Zefeng Zhu
    url: "https://naturegeorge.github.io"
    affiliations:
      name: AAIS, PKU

bibliography: 2022-07-28-genus.bib
toc:
  - name: Backgrounds
  - name: Euler Characteristic

---

## Backgrounds

The biopolymers such as proteins, RNA, and DNA are composed of a finite set of basic building blocks linked with covalent bonds forming a sequential order. Their native states are often involved with intra-molecular non-covalent interactions <d-footnote>except that some residues would form covalent disulfide bonds </d-footnote>toward low-energy conformations. <d-footnote>Not to mention those high energy states and interactions with partners and solvent molecules for now. </d-footnote>People have come up with many ways to describe those interactions. The concept of "interaction" (i.e. graph) itself has sound mathematical formulations, and the **genus** is such a quantitative measurement. And we can apply it to analyze the topological properties of biomolecular structures.

## Euler Characteristic

From graph duality, we know that for any convex polyhedron's surface, we have:

$$
\begin{aligned}
  E+2 &= V+F \\
  2 &= V-E+F
\end{aligned}
$$

And the Euler characteristic is formulated as:

$$
\chi= V-E+F
$$

for the surfaces of polyhedra, where

* $$V$$: the numbers of vertices
* $$E$$: the numbers of edges
* $$F$$: the numbers of faces

For general surfaces, we can also calculate their Euler characteristic by deriving a polygonization of the surfaces.
Besides, we can consider a closed orientable surface as a "convex" polyhedron surface but with holes<d-footnote>with one hole, such a surface is a torus.</d-footnote>. The number of holes is called **genus** and denoted as $$g$$. Thus:

$$
\begin{aligned}
  \chi &= V-\underbrace{(E-n+n)}_{E'}+\underbrace{(F - 2g)}_{F'} \\
  &=2-2g
\end{aligned}
$$

If such surfaces with $$r$$ boundary components:

$$
\chi = 2-2g-r
$$

...

$$
b − n = 2 − 2g − r
$$

<d-cite key="Zajac2018"></d-cite><d-cite key="Rubach2019"></d-cite>

***

Cited as:

```bibtex
@online{zhu2022instant-notes-on-genus,
        title={Instant Notes - Genus},
        author={Zefeng Zhu},
        year={2022},
        month={July},
        url={https://naturegeorge.github.io/blog/2022/07/genus/},
}
```
